CIP: Add Hyperlane protocol (#263)
celestiaorg/CIPs: cips/cip-add-hyperlane.md

| cip           | xx                                                                                         |
|---------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| title         | Add Hyperlane to Celestia                                                                  |
| description   | This CIP proposes adding Hyperlane to celestia-app.                                        |
| author        | c-node [@c-node](https://github.com/S1nus), Callum Waters (@cmwaters)                      |

> | discussions-to | [forum](https://forum.celestia.org/t/cip-add-hyperlane-bridging/1909)                     |                                                                     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| discussions-to | [forum](https://forum.celestia.org/t/cip-add-hyperlane-bridging/1909)                     |
```

Reviewer: although it looks fine rendered lol

| status        | Draft                                                                                      |
| type          | Standards Track                                                                            |
| category      | Core                                                                                       |
| created       | 2025-02-21                                                                                 |

## Abstract

> Add Hyperlane interoperability protocol to the Celestia Network to improve accessibility and usage of TIA

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add the Hyperlane interoperability protocol to Celestia to improve the accessibility and usage of TIA.
```

## Motivation

> Hyperlane is a popular bridging protocol that has support for EVM, currently the most popular VM for Celestia Rollups, as well as several others, creating connections between some 130 networks. Hyperlane is already employed indirectly to transfer TIA around but is dependent on third party networks, expanding the trust assumptions. Adding Hyperlane natively allows for direct transferring of TIA and possibly other tokens in the future without expanding the trust assumptions beyond the DA network.

Author: ```suggestion
Hyperlane is a popular bridging protocol that has support for EVM, currently the most popular VM for Celestia Rollups, as well as several others, creating connections between some 100+ networks. Hyperlane is already employed indirectly to transfer TIA around but is dependent on third party networks, expanding the trust assumptions. Adding Hyperlane natively allows for direct transferring of TIA and possibly other tokens in the future without expanding the trust assumptions beyond the DA network.
```

> Hyperlane is a popular bridging protocol that has support for EVM, currently the most popular VM for Celestia Rollups, as well as several others, creating connections between some 130 networks. Hyperlane is already employed indirectly to transfer TIA around but is dependent on third party networks, expanding the trust assumptions. Adding Hyperlane natively allows for direct transferring of TIA and possibly other tokens in the future without expanding the trust assumptions beyond the DA network.

Reviewer 2: [optional] added a few sentences about how Hyperlane differs from IBC and why that might be part of the motivation here.

```suggestion
The only bridging protocol currently deployed on Celestia is IBC. Hyperlane is a widely used bridging protocol that supports EVM—the most popular virtual machine for Celestia Rollups—as well as several other environments. Since IBC doesn't currently support EVM chains, adding Hyperlane to Celestia will enable connections to 100+ networks, many of which are not serviced by IBC. Currently, Hyperlane is used indirectly to transfer TIA, but it relies on third-party networks, which increases trust assumptions. Integrating Hyperlane natively would enable direct transfers of TIA, and potentially other tokens in the future, without expanding trust assumptions beyond the DA network.
```

Reviewer 2: IDK about the 130 network number because the Hyperlane website claims 100+ and the Hyperlane registry has 108 chains listed.

Ref:
- https://github.com/hyperlane-xyz/hyperlane-registry/tree/main/chains
- https://hyperlane.xyz/

Author: I think I got this number from Jacob. I don't mind replacing it with 100+ - I guess the idea is just to explain the extent of it's connectivity

## Specification

The full specification of the Hyperlane protocol can be found in their [docs](https://docs.hyperlane.xyz/). The protocol has many similarities with IBC. Messages can be sent and received by writing them to the state tree. A relayer reads the state of one network and relays the messages along with some proof to another network. Warp routes is the standard application built on top of the messaging protocol that supports transferring of tokens.

### Detailed Design

> Hyperlane on Celestia, more concretely, requires the addition of two SDK modules: `x/core` and `x/warp`. These are imported from https://github.com/bcp-innovations/hyperlane-cosmos. Token transfer will be enabled upon upgrade.

Reviewer 2: [optional] 

```suggestion
Hyperlane on Celestia, more concretely, requires the addition of two SDK modules: `x/core` and `x/warp`. These are imported from https://github.com/bcp-innovations/hyperlane-cosmos. These two modules will be added in the next upgrade which will enable token transfers to other Hyperlane enabled chains.
```

Author: The last sentence refers to an actual parameter that needs to be set to actually switch on token transfers. Maybe that wasn't clear

> Similar to IBC, non-native tokens will initially not be allowed on Celestia's state machine. This is enforced by disabling the creating of [synthetic tokens](https://github.com/bcp-innovations/hyperlane-cosmos/blob/2617881125228632edb091f0663d133b76de11ee/x/warp/keeper/msg_server.go#L20).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similar to IBC, non-native tokens will initially not be allowed on Celestia's state machine. This is enforced by disabling the creation of [synthetic tokens](https://github.com/bcp-innovations/hyperlane-cosmos/blob/2617881125228632edb091f0663d133b76de11ee/x/warp/keeper/msg_server.go#L20).
```

> The only ISM (Interchain Security Module) that will be initially supported is the MultiSig ISM, which relies on attestations from n of m "validators" (Note that this can be different to the PoS Validators)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The only ISM (Interchain Security Module) that will be initially supported is the MultiSig ISM, which relies on attestations from N of M "validators". Note that the MultiSig ISM validator set can be different from the the PoS validator set.
```

## Backwards Compatibility

This is an additive change. It does not break existing user flows in any way. It does however change the state transition function and requires a major upgrade.

## Test Cases

- An E2E test that connects an EVM Rollup and Celestia with Hyperlane and successfully transfers TIA from Celestia to that Rollup and back.

> - A test confirming that tokens from a counterparty chain can not be transferred to Celestia.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A test confirming that non-TIA tokens from a counterparty chain can not be transferred to Celestia.
```

## Reference Implementation

TBD

## Security Considerations

The Cosmos SDK Hyperlane implementation is audited by Zellic. 

> Token transferring through Hyperlane is dependent on the ISM being used and inherits there security assumptions (i.e. that n of m agents are honest).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Token transferring through Hyperlane is dependent on the ISM being used and inherits their security assumptions (i.e. that N of M MultiSig validators are honest).
```
